HARI SREENIVASAN: Good evening.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Judy Woodruff is on assignment.
On tonight's "PBS NewsHour":
Donald Trump
turns again to social media,
unleashing a
storm of tweets, while Hillary
Clinton keeps
up her attacks on the trail.
Also ahead: in search of a
better life, how
Nigerian women are being conned
by fellow
Africans to work as prostitutes
on the streets
of Italy.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The problem is,
their clientele
is poor.
The prices are low, which means
that the girls
have to work extra hard to pay
back their
debt.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And it's
Friday.
Mark Shields and David Brooks
are here to
analyze this week's political
fallout following
the first presidential debate.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: The
presidential campaign
erupted with new broadsides
today.
Donald Trump unloaded on a
critic who made
headlines against him this week,
and Hillary
Clinton fired back, all of this
with the candidates
about to enter the final full
month before
Election Day.
Donald Trump's campaign day
began long before
he got to President Gerald
Ford's tomb in
Grand Rapids, Michigan.
Early this morning, he
unleashing a storm
of tweets against Alicia
Machado, a former
Miss Universe winner.
Trump had once mocked her weight
gain, and
Clinton raised the issue in
Monday's debate.
Today, the Republican nominee
charged Machado
once starred in a sex tape, and
the Clinton
campaign helped her gain U.S.
citizenship.
That came a day after Trump
raised former
President Bill Clinton's
impeachment scandal.
Machado called the charges cheap
lies and
said on Instagram: "The
Republican candidate
insists on discrediting and
demoralizing a
woman."
The Clinton campaign called the
allegations
unhinged.
The candidate herself had an
answer to Trump's
charges at an afternoon rally in
Coral Springs,
Florida.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
I mean, really, who gets up at
3:00 in the
morning to engage in a Twitter
attack against
a former Miss Universe?
I mean, he hurled as many
insults as he could.
I have said it before, and I
will say it again:
A man who can be provoked by a
tweet should
not be anywhere near the nuclear
codes.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Meanwhile, a
Washington
Post report found Trump's
charitable foundation
has never had the required
certification from
the state of New York.
That means the group has not
submitted to
annual audits.
If the state attorney general
finds the law
was broken, he could go to court
to make the
foundation return money it
raised.
Also today, for the first time
ever, USA Today
rendered judgment on a
presidential race.
It branded Trump erratic,
ill-equipped to
be commander in chief and a
serial liar, but
didn't directly endorse Clinton.
Several traditionally Republican
newspapers
have also come out against Trump
this week.
The Trump campaign is trying to
fight back,
with this new TV ad.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Why
aren't I 50 points
ahead, you might ask.
NARRATOR: Maybe it's because the
director
of the FBI said you lied about
your e-mails.
JAMES COMEY, FBI Director: There
was classified
material e-mailed.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Later today,
he rallied
supporters in Novi, Michigan.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
When you cast that ballot, just
picture a
Wall Street boardroom filled
with the special
interests who have bleeding your
country and
your city and everyplace else,
and imagine
the look on their faces when you
tell them,
you're fired, fired.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Away from the
charges and
countercharges, Clinton today
unveiled her
new national service reserve
plan in a speech
in Fort Pierce, Florida.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: I didn't
want this
campaign to end without talking
about it,
because it means a lot to me.
I'm trying to end the campaign
focusing on
issues that are really close to
my heart,
and this is one of them.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The end of the
campaign
comes in 39 days.
In the day's other news: A
disciplinary court
in Alabama suspended Chief
Justice Roy Moore
over gay marriage.
The panel found he encouraged
probate judges
to deny marriage licenses for
same-sex couples.
The U.S. Supreme Court had said
there is a
fundamental right to marry.
Moore is suspended for the
remainder of his
elected term through 2019.
After that, he will be too old
to run again,
under state law.
Federal investigators in
Hoboken, New Jersey,
have recovered one of the two
black box recorders
from a wrecked commuter train.
The train smashed through a
barrier and into
a station waiting area
yesterday.
One person was killed and more
than 100 were
hurt.
The recorders should have data
on the train's
speed, braking and other
conditions in the
moments before the crash.
The United Nations appealed
today for a new
truce in the Syrian city of
Aleppo.
But heavy fighting continued,
and Syrian and
Russian airstrikes blasted more
of the city
into ruins.
We have a report from Alex
Thomson of Independent
Television News.
ALEX THOMSON: In rebel-held East
Aleppo, the
agony continues.
It can't be independently
verified, but he
says Russian jets dropped a
thermobaric bomb.
Six were killed, six injured,
six missing,
another airstrike in the
besieged east of
the city, desperate to get out
from this.
But hands are all the rescuers
have.
Finally, he's out, more or less
intact.
RICK BRENNAN, World Health
Organization: The
situation really is
unfathomable.
According to health officials
there, there've
been 338 deaths in the last
couple of weeks
due to the bombardment,
including 106 children.
ALEX THOMSON: South, to the
countryside near
Damascus itself, where people
held a street
protest in solidarity with those
in Aleppo,
burning the Russian flag.
The posters say Putin is a war
criminal.
In the grinding violence of
Syria, street
action like this, where the
revolution began,
looks almost quaint six years
on.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The New York
Times reports
Secretary of State John Kerry
voiced frustration
over the Obama administration's
approach to
Syria speaking on the sidelines
of the United
Nations General Assembly last
week, Kerry
said he advocated for more
military action,
but lost that argument.
In the Philippines, outspoken
President Rodrigo
Duterte drew new criticism today
for comparing
his war on drugs to Adolf
Hitler's extermination
of Jews.
Since Duterte took office in
July, more than
3,000 suspected dealers and
users have been
killed, often vigilante-style.
But he suggested that's just the
beginning.
RODRIGO DUTERTE, Philippine
President: Now
there is three million, what is
it, three
million drug addicts.
There are.
I would be happy to slaughter
them.
At least, if Germany had Hitler,
the Philippines
would have me.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The World
Jewish Congress,
the government of Germany, and
others condemned
the remark.
Europe's Rosetta spacecraft
ended its historic
mission to a comet today.
Ground controllers crashed the
probe after
surveying the surface up close
for two years.
Animation showed Rosetta flying
closer and
closer before its final
collision.
It had collected vast amounts of
data, and
even sent a lander to the
comet's surface
in 2014.
There's new guidance on Zika for
couples planning
pregnancy.
The Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention
now say men who've been exposed
to the virus
should wait six months, instead
of eight weeks.
It also warns against travel to
11 additional
Southeast Asian countries where
Zika is present.
That includes Thailand, which
today confirmed
its first cases of birth defects
caused by
Zika.
Banks and energy stocks led Wall
Street higher
today.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained 164
points to close at one 18308.
The Nasdaq rose nearly 43
points, and the
S&P 500 added 17.
And several governors in Japan
have joined
a campaign for men to shoulder
the burden
of child care and housework,
literally.
A new video shows them wearing
16-pound vests
to simulate being seven months
pregnant.
After grocery shopping, hoofing
up stairs
and folding laundry, one says he
finally understands
what his wife put up with.
In Japan, women do five times
the housework
that men do.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
an iconic
Israeli statesman laid to rest;
the new streamlined
application for student
financial aid; migrants
saved from the Mediterranean
Sea, only to
be forced into prostitution; and
much more.
Thousands gathered in Jerusalem
today, as
Israel laid to rest one of its
founding fathers.
Shimon Peres, the 93-year-old
former president
and prime minister, died on
Wednesday.
William Brangham has our report
on the funeral.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The funeral
service for
Shimon Peres drew delegations
from 75 countries,
and even temporarily united
adversaries.
Palestinian President Mahmoud
Abbas shook
hands with Israeli Prime
Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu and his wife.
The casket was carried in, a
military rabbi
sang traditional prayers, and
Netanyahu spoke
in praise of his longtime
political rival.
BENJAMIN NETANYAHU, Israeli
Prime Minister
(through translator): He brought
arguments
from the left.
I brought arguments from the
right.
Eventually, like two tired
boxers, we stopped
arguing.
I saw in his eyes and I think he
saw in mine
that the determination emanates
from deep
self-persuasion and devotion to
the cause,
securing the country's future.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Netanyahu has
taken a hard
line on dealing with the
Palestinians, while
Peres was Israel's leading
proponent of conciliation.
But the prime minister, speaking
in English,
hailed the Nobel Peace Prize
winner as a visionary.
BENJAMIN NETANYAHU: Shimon lived
a life of
purpose.
He soared to incredible heights.
He swept so many with his vision
and his hope.
He was a great man of Israel.
He was a great man of the world.
Israel grieves for him.
The world grieves for him.
But we find hope in his legacy,
as does the
world.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The failed
search for peace
in the region dominated the
eulogies.
Former President Bill Clinton
was in office
when Peres negotiated the 1993
Oslo Accords
with the Palestinians.
BILL CLINTON, Former President
of the United
States: He started off life as
Israel's brightest
student, became its best
teacher, and ended
up its biggest dreamer.
So, for the rest of our lives,
whenever the
good we seek to do hits a stone
wall, or the
hand of friendship we extend
meets only a
cold stare, in his honor, I ask
that we remember
Shimon Peres' luminous smile and
imagine.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: President
Obama has sought
in vain a final Middle East
settlement between
Israelis and Palestinians.
He called for building on the
foundation that
Peres laid.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
We gather here in the knowledge
that Shimon
never saw his dream of peace
fulfilled.
The region is going through a
chaotic time.
Threats are ever-present.
And yet he didn't stop dreaming
and he didn't
stop working.
The last of the founding
generation is now
gone.
Shimon accomplished enough
things in life
for 1,000 men, but he understood
that it is
better to live to the very end
of his time
on Earth with a longing not for
the past,
but for the dreams that have not
yet come
true, an Israel that is secure
in a just and
lasting peace with its
neighbors.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: After the
service, a military
honor guard carried Peres'
casket to its burial
site, and he was laid to rest
before a crowd
of family, friends and world
leaders.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
William Brangham.
HARI SREENIVASAN: For high
school seniors
around the country and their
families, it's
the season to think about
college applications
and costs.
A key to all of it, of course,
is, what kind
of financial aid can they
receive?
It's even more crucial for low-
and middle-income
students who may be leaving
thousands of potential
dollars on the table each year.
Starting this weekend, there are
important
changes for a student filling
out the Free
Application for Federal Student
Aid, also
known as FAFSA.
For one thing, they will be able
to fill it
out months earlier, in the hopes
of getting
information as they try to
choose a school.
Let's fill in the picture.
Kim Cook is the executive
director of the
National College Access Network,
which works
closely on these issues.
So, first, what's the
significance of what's
happening this weekend?
KIM COOK, Executive Director,
National College
Access Network: It's tremendous.
Right now, over 1.4 million
students left
$2.7 billion in financial aid on
the table
by not completing the Free
Application for
Federal Student Aid.
So, these changes that will make
the form
earlier and easier for students
are significant
in helping many of those
low-income students
access the money they need to
attend college.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And one of the
significant
complaints was how complex it
was, how much
information they needed.
Now apparently there is a
connection between
your previous tax filing that
you can sort
of autopopulate online.
KIM COOK: There is, so that's
called the Internal
Revenue Service data retrieval
tool in lingo.
What's significant about these
changes that
are coming online tomorrow are
that more students
can more easily transfer that
tax information
because it's currently available
tax data.
In the past, we asked students
to transfer
the date that really wasn't
available until
tax filing deadlines.
But now we're going back another
year to make
it more available and easier for
students
to populate the forms with that
income information
that is sometimes hard to find.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now, there is
also that
gap between when you found out
if a school
wanted you or not and then
another couple
of weeks or months to figure out
what kind
of financial aid you were going
to get from
them.
KIM COOK: Exactly.
So, because of the filing times
that used
to be in January, financial aid
offices were
under the gun to get award
applications out
to students, so that they could
make informed
decisions about what kind of aid
was available
at each particular school, and
where they
could afford and make that
college choice.
More importantly, on the front
end, there
was a crunch that we asked
students to think
about which colleges they would
apply or go
to before they had any sense of
their aid
eligibility, never mind what
they will have
now, which is a commitment of
federal student
aid on the front end, as early
as October
now, as they go into their
college search
and application time.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, this was
part of the
general disincentive over kind
of the burdens
of trying to get in, I don't
know how much
money I'm going to get, I don't
who is going
to accept me, and kind of one
competing with
the other.
KIM COOK: Right.
Right.
So, now we're giving students an
early commitment
of at least their federal aid,
so a low-income
student who receives a Pell
Grant and subsidized
loans could have up to $11,500
of a commitment
as they look around and, A, make
the important
decision that college is
affordable and something
for me, and, B, where to go,
that I have a
commitment of money in my pocket
to make this
possible.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, what
happens if the
colleges just decide to move all
of their
deadlines up?
There's been some concern,
especially for
low- and middle-income
households, that a
deadline creep actually adds a
lot of pressure
and decreases the amount of
completed applications.
KIM COOK: We're watching
carefully in this
first year, because that is a
concern, that
students could have a real
crunch to push
what used to be a longer process
and truncate
that process of admissions and
financial aid
into the same three months.
The good news is, regardless of
how that does
play out this year, the May 1
commitment date
holds steady.
So, students could have that
information earlier,
but they can't be pressured to
commit to an
aid package before May 1.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now, you said
in the beginning,
but it's kind of staggering to
think about
$2 billion left on the table.
How many students start this
process and don't
finish?
KIM COOK: We're still trying to
get some of
that data.
Right now, we know how many
students don't
complete.
So, 45 -- only 45 percent of
high school seniors
complete a FAFSA by their high
school graduation.
Some continue to complete it
after high school
graduation as well.
But that's still a staggering
number, when
you consider that the FAFSA is
the ultimate
predictor of whether a student
will go on
to enroll in college, with 90
percent of those
completing a FAFSA enrolling in
college.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And it's also
interesting
that there are multiple things.
It's not just family income that
figures out
what kind of aid you get.
KIM COOK: Right.
So, income obviously plays a
significant role,
but the number in college,
whether your family
qualifies for other federal
means-tested benefits,
where you go to college, so,
many, many factors
factor in.
The key message that we want to
get across
and is part of a national FAFSA
completion
campaign that NCAN is kicking
off called Form
Your Future, is that this is
your first step
to going to college.
All students should complete the
FAFSA and
get the money for which they're
eligible.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And even
whether the type
of household that you're in,
what kind of
siblings, if you have other
siblings in school,
are all factors.
KIM COOK: Exactly.
Exactly.
Number in household, number in
college, all
of those factors come into play.
So, we don't want any students
to rule themselves
out.
We want all students to complete
that FAFSA
to get that money that has been
left on the
table.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right, Kim
Cook, thanks
so much.
KIM COOK: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
foreign hackers
target voter registration
systems; and Mark
Shields and David Brooks, their
take on the
week's political news.
But first: the harrowing story
of Nigerian
women fleeing to Europe for a
better life,
but finding themselves trapped
into a life
of prostitution.
The latest figures from the
International
Organization for Migration
estimate that 80
percent of all Nigerian women
that make it
across the Mediterranean to
Italy are forced
into the sex trade.
At its heart are female
traffickers who enslave
women to extort tens of
thousands of dollars.
From Italy, special
correspondent Malcolm
Brabant reports.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Asti in
Northern Italy prides
itself as the capital of the
country's sparkling
wine industry.
But there's another side to this
city.
It's home to African women
rescued after being
trafficked as prostitutes.
Like so many compatriots,
26-year-old Blessing
Ighodaro was seeking a better
life in Europe.
The mother of three arrived in
Italy from
Nigeria in June after being
deceived.
BLESSING IGHODARO, Italy: The
story I was
told in Nigeria before I come to
this place,
that if I come to this place, I
can have a
job of cleaning.
Italian women, I can help them
to be cleaning
the house, taking care of their
children.
MALCOLM BRABANT: After a hellish
journey to
Libya across the Sahara Desert,
Blessing was
put in a rubber dinghy and
almost drowned
in similar circumstances to the
21 women who
died in this boat in July.
BLESSING IGHODARO: When the
water is here,
when I stand up, I was -- the
water is in
my place here.
Oh, God, my children, my family,
I don't want
to lose my life like this.
It's like that.
I was frightened.
There was ton of water on my
body, water on
my face, pressing me down.
I was the first person which
they rescued
after the children, because I'm
already unconscious.
I don't have any strength,
nothing, nothing.
MALCOLM BRABANT: These images
are of the aftermath
of the July disaster, in which
21 African
women died.
If the latest statistics are
applied, at least
16 of the victims were facing a
life of prostitution
on European streets.
In death, they were spared in
one respect,
spared the pressure faced by
Blessing as the
Nigerian trafficker, or madam,
tried to extort
the 35,000 euros or nearly
$40,000 she claimed
was owing for the journey to
Europe.
BLESSING IGHODARO: I should put
on some sexy
clothes.
I go out there, look for money.
You know you have to.
You have family.
You need to pay me my bill,
which you take
an oath for.
And let me warn you.
Never you tell anyone that this
madam brought
you here.
That is the oath I take.
There is a night, which normally
I sleep.
I say, God, what am I going to
do?
I can't even feed myself.
Nothing.
I don't even know where to go.
Where will I stay ?
So, I decided to put on my sexy
clothes.
And I go out there.
The first day, I have 120 euro.
And I was very -- say, 120 euro,
is that how
I'm going to pay 35,000 euro?
MALCOLM BRABANT: But Blessing
heard about
a program in Asti to help sex
trafficking
victims break free from the
madam.
She abandoned the streets,
despite the intimidation.
BLESSING IGHODARO: If I didn't
pay her the
money, that is where she's going
to hurt my
family.
And if I can't pay her the
money, she has
no business with my family.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But you haven't
paid her
the money, have you?
BLESSING IGHODARO: No, no, no,
no.
I won't pay.
MALCOLM BRABANT:
Eighteen-year-old Cynthia
tells a similar story of false
promises and
being forced into prostitution.
Like Blessing, she broke with
help from Princess
Inyang Okokon.
Princess was rescued from the
sex trade, and
is now dedicated to thwarting
the madams.
PRINCESS INYANG OKOKON,
Activist: At Turin,
they sold me to one madam.
She bought me.
I was the first girl of this
woman.
And she was a young woman like
me.
When I got there, I realized
that it was prostitution.
I need to do.
I didn't do the job.
They took me to the place of
work.
I waited almost a week.
I couldn't do it.
I was crying, telling God, is
this the job
you sent me to come and do?
CYNTHIA, Italy: They took me to
street junction.
That is where I would be doing
road work.
And this was not what she told
me that I would
be doing.
She said that that is the work
that she is
doing here, that that is work I
have to do.
She was like threatening me that
I'm not out
on there streets, I should also
be thinking
about my family at home, that
she would harm
them.
She would do all sorts of
things.
I said, no, that I cannot do it.
She said OK.
Since I'm a very stubborn girl,
she knows
what she will do to me.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The victims of
this potentially
deadly trade are usually naive,
ill-educated,
or poor.
The trafficking networks
especially prey on
women from the African
countryside.
PRINCESS INYANG OKOKON: They are
operators,
like young boys, goes into the
rural areas,
goes into the families that
knows maybe their
parents are sick, goes into the
families that
lack money to train their
children, and goes
into the areas that they have
people that
are weak.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Although four
out of every
five women rescued in the
Western Mediterranean
end up in the sex trade,
Princess believes
the Italian mafia is not guilty
in this case.
PRINCESS INYANG OKOKON:
Nigerians, Ghanaians
are involved, but Italian mafia
are not really
involved in this prostitution
criminal event.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Although their
prime intention
is saving lives, the reality for
organizations
rescuing migrants from drowning
is that they
have inadvertently become a key
link in the
transport chain supplying
prostitutes to Europe.
According to Princess, the women
are terrorized
into compliance by black magic
or juju.
PRINCESS INYANG OKOKON: These
rituals is normally
done by the juju masters in
Nigeria.
They use some things like the
heart of some
animals to make these rituals.
Being that the women are poor,
from poor family,
they will entice to threaten
them, tell them
swear an oath that if you arrive
and you don't
pay me, the oath will kill you
or your family
or your sisters or your
brothers, your children.
MALCOLM BRABANT: One of the most
significant
factors about the ever expanding
migrant crisis
is the disproportionately large
number of
single young men making the
crossing to Europe.
Now, these Nigerian madams, have
unwittingly,
or on purpose, found that this
is a group
that's going to make them a lot
of money,
because all of the rescued girls
that we have
spoken to have indicated that
the majority
of their clients are African or
from countries
where Arabic is spoken, like
Morocco, and
there are very few Italians.
The problem is their clientele
is poor, the
prices are low, which means that
the girls
have to work extra hard to pay
back their
debt.
To hear a different perspective
from provincial
Asti, we have come to prosperous
Milan, a
magnet for African migrants,
where Europe's
reality kicks in.
Many people find themselves
living in the
open here because neighboring
countries like
France, Switzerland and Austria
have tightened
up their border controls.
Fabio Di Giacomo works for the
International
Organization for Migration.
FABIO DI GIACOMO, International
Organization
for Migration: The request for
these girls
comes not from migrants, but
from local people
in Italy and in Europe.
These girls used to arrive to
Italy and to
work in Italy as prostitutes,
but, as a matter
of fact, we have noticed in the
past few months
that some of these women are
actually continuing
their journey to France,
Austria, Spain, and
Germany.
This is modern slavery.
These girls are forced to face
terrible abuses
and violence in the countries of
origin, in
the country of transit.
But they don't even know the
kind of abuse
they are going to be forced to
face here in
Europe.
It's something that should be
tackled as soon
as possible.
It's a modern plague.
MALCOLM BRABANT: And the
perpetrators aren't
concerned about the age of their
victims.
WOMAN: The girl is 14 years, but
she told
us she's 17.
You know the way she speak, you
know that
she is a baby.
So the madam brought her to walk
in the streets,
and luckily enough, she gets in
touch with
us and we save her.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Onome Efanadju
is 17 years
old.
She came to Italy last year and
worked as
a prostitute for two months
before being rescued.
She's now a catering trainee at
an Italian
company offering dozens of women
skills to
pursue a better life.
ONOME EFANADJU, Italy: You girls
in Nigeria,
in case someone wants to take
you, there's
no good job in -- there's no
work in Europe.
They are only deceiving us to
come to Europe.
All they do is to bring you here
and to sell
your body, so you better think
twice before
you come to Europe.
MALCOLM BRABANT: This shows the
psychological
pressure to which the women are
subjected.
After ignoring repeated messages
from the
Nigerian madam who trafficked
her, Blessing
answers her phone.
WOMAN: This woman is now angry
that she got
a good life here and she forgot
the debts
that she's supposed to go and
work in the
streets and pay her debt.
I feel bad.
What am I am doing to myself?
What is this?
I will be crying, sometimes, two
days, three
days.
I can't eat.
I can't do anything else.
And she will be calling me to
bring money.
"You don't want to pay me.
I will be waiting for your
money.
I will be doing this."
So, she will be calling me for
money.
My body is shaking.
I'm worried.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The personal
tragedies are
never-ending.
Gloria, a 32-year-old
hairdresser, was lured
to Europe under false pretenses,
and as a
result, has lost touch with her
three young
children.
GLORIA Italy: Three years, and I
have never
seen them.
There's nothing I can do.
I can't disappear there.
I'm not a witch.
I have to see my children.
I don't have anybody to help me.
If I had the choice, I would go
for me to
see my children.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The trade
appears to be self-perpetuating.
Many of the madams are
themselves former victims
of trafficking.
PRINCESS INYANG OKOKON: They
know the horrible
things they met in the street.
That means they purposely take
another human
to face the same calamity they
faced.
That is my anger.
If you were a slave, don't put
another person
to be a slave after you.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Unfortunately
for Northern
Italy's street walkers,
Princess' rescue organization
is running out of money and has
failed to
secure future funding.
So, the chances of escaping are
reduced, and
thousands more women are
expected.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant
in Asti, Northern Italy.
since revelations in June that
the Democratic
National Committee and
Democratic Congressional
Committee's data had been
stolen.
U.S. intelligence official
pointed the finger
at Russian-government-linked
hackers, though
wouldn't say so publicly.
Separately, Illinois and
Arizona's voter registration
databases were penetrated in
June, forcing
them to temporarily shut down.
This week, FBI Director James
Comey told Congress
there had been new attempts to
penetrate many
more state voter databases.
Margaret Warner has been looking
into this
and joins me now.
So, what's the real danger to
the elections
if voter registration databases
are being
hacked?
MARGARET WARNER: Hari, on one
hand, it could
be strictly criminal.
People want to get addresses,
home phone numbers,
e-mails, and use it for criminal
purposes.
And many states have had to deal
with that
in the past.
But the other danger is that
that information
can be used to selectively used
to manipulate
the vote on Election Day.
For example, send out e-mails to
voters in
certain districts, perhaps
minority districts,
and, oh, your registration place
has been
changed, your voting place has
been changed.
And this has been done often by
phone.
It's an old, old trick.
Or to simply to delete them from
the database,
so when they get there, there is
incredible
confusion.
So, as a senior homeland
security official
told me this afternoon, the
other danger that
really worries us is that just
the news of
these hacks undermined American
voters' view
of the credibility of the U.S.
election system.
And there are certainly foreign
powers who
would like to do that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, let's talk
about those
foreign powers.
Do the U.S. officials believe
that the Russians
are behind this or any of the
other hacks
that have been related so far?
MARGARET WARNER: Yes.
First of all, they established
that they were
behind the hacks you mentioned
earlier, the
DNC and the DCCC, and that there
are two sort
of outfits, what is called Fancy
Bear -- it's
a nickname -- and one is Cozy
Bear.
One is linked to the old KGB
called the GRU
and one is linked to military
intelligence.
And I was told by cyber-experts
who have been
involved in these investigations
that these
voter database hacks are the
work of so-called
Fancy Bear, which is the one
side to Russian
military intelligence.
This is the same outfit that, in
Ukraine,
in Ukrainian elections two years
ago, penetrated
the database of the Ukrainian
election authorities
and tried to switch the actual
plate that
showed who was winning where.
They didn't succeed, but the
fake plate that
showed someone else won did end
up on Russian
TV in Russia.
HARI SREENIVASAN: That's almost
like a Dewey
wins sign.
MARGARET WARNER: Yes, exactly.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Homeland
Security, Jeh Johnson
said this morning that by design
almost, or
at least by reality, 9,000
different precincts
that we have, they don't all use
the same
system, don't have the same
databases, so
there is not a direct threat in
manipulating
the overall result.
MARGARET WARNER: He's actually
right about
that.
It's a crazy system and, as he
said, 9,000
different precincts.
But there is an Internet
connection at some
point, when most of them report
to the central
commission.
Well, that can always be checked
back.
The other vulnerability, though,
is some states
still use voter touch-screen
machines that
leave no paper audit trail.
So,, like in swing state like
Pennsylvania,
which this is true, in
Philadelphia, there
is no paper trail, whereas, in
Bucks County,
there is.
So if someone who were really
smart, picked
swing districts in swing states
and put malware
in the computer, you know, the
voting machines,
to go off that day and change
every third
Clinton vote for Trump or vice
versa, it would
be impossible to go back later
and check.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What's the
government doing
about this, considering we're 39
days away?
MARGARET WARNER: Well, not as
much as many
cyber-security experts would
like.
What Jeh Johnson, the secretary
of homeland
security, did do right after --
right in midsummer,
was call all the secretaries of
state, had
a big conference call, and say,
look, there
is a big danger out there.
One, we want you to -- and we're
ready to
help.
He sent out a lot of new
standards.
He said you have to be sure to
close all your
open doors.
A lot of these precincts just
don't have the
manpower or the money to do it
right.
And we will give you technical
help.
I was told this afternoon that
18 to 20 of
the states have actually asked
for and received
nightly what's called
cyber-election screening,
where they basically run through
the system
and then they alert, the federal
government
does, Homeland Security does,
and then says
to Iowa, you know, by the way,
we discovered
something funny, you need to
patch this.
That said, that doesn't fix the
election machines
themselves.
So, what they didn't do, the
federal government
chose not to do is declare a
part of critical
infrastructure.
That would have given the
federal government
the ability to go really in and
set up standards
and also send a message to
Russia that this
is really a no-no and this is
considered grounds
for retaliation.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Margaret Warner,
thanks so much.
MARGARET WARNER: My pleasure,
Hari.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And that
brings us to the
analysis of Shields and Brooks.
That's syndicated columnist Mark
Shields and
New York Times columnist David
Brooks.
Gentlemen, here we are.
Monday night, you were here
after the debates.
And now my first question isn't
about a significant
policy discrepancy.
The entire news cycle has been
concerned with
whether or not he paid taxes and
also how
he is treating a beauty queen,
or how he treated
her and how he is still treating
her.
MARK SHIELDS: You're right,
although I don't
think they're bookends.
I don't think they're of equal
value or significance.
I think that his disdain for
paying taxes
and his self-identification as a
smart person
for not doing so reveals any
absence, a total
absence of civic-mindedness,
citizen responsibility.
I mean, the idea of John
Kennedy's ask not
what you can do for your country
-- ask not
what your country can do you
for, but what
you can do for your country, is
just so alien
to that.
But the attack on Alicia Machado
fits a pattern.
I mean, this is a man who, as
Tony Schwartz,
who wrote "The Art of the Deal,"
the ghost
writer of it, and made Trump
really a central
figure in America with that
book, wrote -- he
said, every time he's criticized
or caught
for any of his lies, he doubles
down
And that's exactly what he does.
And usually in the pattern with
Mr. and Mrs.
Khan, the Gold Star parents, and
with Judge
Curiel, is to pick on someone
who doesn't
have the resources, the stature,
the voice
that he does, and try to
overwhelm them.
HARI SREENIVASAN: David, we're
working on
a story for Sunday on kind of
the impact on
the Latino vote in Florida, for
example.
And we even saw, since the
debate, increase
in search registration, searches
in predominantly
Latino areas, according to
Google.
Is this going to matter, the
fact that he
has called this Miss
Housekeeping?
Did that resonate?
Did that connect?
DAVID BROOKS: If the vote can go
any lower.
It might affect turnout
potentially.
But his support in the Latino
community wasn't
super high.
And his support isn't super
high.
So, it may go lower.
But maybe it can't.
But to me, the crucial fact of
this story
-- well, first, we should just
step back and
be aware of its bizarreness,
that we are a
month away from electing a
president and one
of our candidates is up in the
middle of the
night tweeting about an alleged
sex tape.
MARK SHIELDS: A 70-year-old
grandfather.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
Yes.
It's just another day in
paradise as far as
this election goes.
And so we should just continue
to remind ourselves
of that bizarreness.
But, to me, the significance of
the tweets
in the morning or in the middle
of the night
were the solitariness of the
guy.
Now, most campaigns, they're a
campaign.
It's a team.
An administration is a team.
And there is a front person and
an ultimate
insider, but it's a team effort,
and decisions
are made and strategies are
discussed and
decisions.
But he's alone in the middle of
the night
upending his whole campaign with
this, I don't,
impulse-driven tweetstorm.
And that to me is the most
unnerving part
of the whole thing, let alone
the low-class
nature of the thing, is that
he's unorganizationable.
And it's just -- it's been his
secret of his
success, but it's hard to
imagine a president
acting that way.
MARK SHIELDS: Could I just add
one thing to
what David said?
And I agree with the point he
made.
The discussion on the debate on
Iraq, all
right, 2.8 million Americans
have served in
uniform many multiple tours in
Iraq and Afghanistan
over the last 15 years; 6,890
have died, been
killed.
And as Donald Trump discussed
that war, it
was all about him.
It was about his alleged
discussions, his
discredited argument that, in
2002, as a real
estate mogul in New York, in
private, off-the-air
conversations with Sean Hannity,
he had opposed
the war.
It turns out the war wasn't
about the United
States or those who fought it or
those people
there in that area who suffered
through it.
It's about Donald Trump.
And it comes back to that.
It is -- a really successful
presidential
campaign is always about the
voters.
It's about their hopes, their
lives, their
futures, their country.
And that's the only chance you
have to lead
a country if you do win.
And this is all about him.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Clinton's
campaigning today
in Florida, a large Cuban
American community.
And earlier this week, there was
a story led
by "Newsweek" and other outlets
also talked
about how Donald Trump had
business interests
that were trying to do business
in Cuba.
And this was during a time when
there were
economic sanctions, and this
might be a violation
of those rules.
Does that matter to that
community there?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
Well, the short answer is, I
don't know.
The second answer is that the
Cuban issue,
I think, has been dissolved by
what's happened
over the last four years.
And it hasn't particularly hurt
Barack Obama
in Florida to take the position
he's taken.
And so it may hurt him on some,
but I have
trouble believing that anybody
not -- the
Cuban American population that
is super Republican
was already pretty super
Republican.
To me, the violation of U.S. law
with the
Cuba thing is symptomatic of one
thing about
Donald Trump.
And I'm a big fan of capitalism,
but capitalism
unrestrained by any moral system
and any sense
of moral restraint, that you're
just about
money and you're just about
selfishness, is
a very destructive and corrosive
thing.
And so whether it's bragging
about not paying
taxes or just trying to make
money any way
you can regardless of the law or
regardless
decency, or stiffing your
contractors, that's
sort of -- we the devolution of
what capitalism
can become when the human beings
who do it
don't have some other moral
system to go to,
to sort of check selfishness.
And that's what we see.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Hillary
Clinton is working
hard to try to win millennial
voters back
from third-party candidates.
You think that perhaps the
Libertarian candidate
would have pulled more from
Donald Trump than
from her, but why is she not
connecting?
MARK SHIELDS: She's never
connected.
Bernie Sanders cleaned her clock
among younger
voters.
There is not the sense of either
rebellion
or inspiration or vision.
I mean, you can check off all
the boxes.
She's good on the issues.
She's good on student loans and
so forth.
But it's an important segment.
I mean, this was a key segment
to -- element.
They represented one out of five
voters, voters
between the ages of 18 and 29,
in 2012 for
Barack Obama.
They represented more votes
really in actual
terms than did voters over the
age of 65.
And they didn't turn out in
2014, and the
Democrats got murdered in the
off-year.
And the over-65 represented 9
percent more
than did the 18-to-29-year-olds.
So, it's not a question simply
of reaching
them and converting them.
It's energizing them and getting
them to the
polls.
If I may just add, Gary Johnson,
who got the
endorsement this week of The
Chicago Tribune
and The Detroit News, I mean,
when he couldn't
name a single -- he couldn't
name the Dalai
Lama or Pope Francis or Justin
Trudeau or
anybody that he liked or admired
as a foreign
leader, may well have hurt the
case for normalization
of marijuana.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: He just -- I think
he hurt himself
as a candidate -- I really do --
with this
group and anybody else.
HARI SREENIVASAN: David, how
much of this
is the fact that the first-time
voters perhaps
don't remember the impact that a
third candidate
or a party can have?
In the year 2000, these folks
were maybe in
elementary school.
DAVID BROOKS: It would be
interesting, if
the polls are super tight at the
end, whether
Johnson would begin to fade.
I suspect that he probably
would.
But she just doesn't speak the
language of
millennials, not that Trump
does, and he's
even worse.
But one thing young people have
a lot of,
it's future.
And they want to feel some sense
of lift and
idealism about the future.
And they want to be called.
And just saying, oh, I will give
you free
college, without any sense of
lift, without
any sense of transformation of
society, which
Sanders did offer, then it's
just not speaking
the language of hope and
inspiration, idealism,
which hopefully people of all
ages respond
to.
And that's the part of a
campaign that's been
lacking for her.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You mentioned
the endorsements
from The Chicago Tribune, but
the USA Today
took an unusual step.
Lots of papers are taking their
steps.
They're making their case for
one candidate
or another.
Do these endorsements matter,
considering
how upside-down world this cycle
seems to
be?
Or are we just saying my
Facebook feed says
this, this is what I should do?
MARK SHIELDS: As an alumnus of
editorial writing,
of course they do.
Everybody sits on the edge of
their seat.
I'm not sure that people are
saying, well,
I want to see what The Arizona
Republic said.
But when you get papers like The
Arizona Republic,
which, in its history, has never
endorsed
a Democrat, The Dallas Morning
News, the last
Democrat endorsed was Franklin
Roosevelt in
1940, the Cincinnati Enquirer
was Woodrow
Wilson 1916 -- and I read it at
the time.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: I think it has a
cumulative
effect, because the theme that
runs through
them is not an embrace of
Hillary Clinton
and the Democratic platform.
It's a rejection.
I mean, it's going on the record
in just categorical
terms that he's unacceptable as
a presidential
candidate.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
I would say signed columns have
a big impact,
but unsigned editorials...
(CROSSTALK)
(LAUGHTER)
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right, let
me squeeze
in one non-election-related.
This week, we saw a very strange
thing from
Congress.
This was the first veto of
President Obama's
first entire eight years, and it
was about
whether or not families should
be able to
sue Saudi Arabia, 9/11 families,
and then
it was overridden by Congress.
And then, the day after that, we
get people
getting up to that podium
saying, well, we
have to kind of look at this
again.
MARK SHIELDS: I have been a
defender of Congress
for a long time.
And after they took off seven
weeks and come
back here to pick up clean
shirts and their
checks, and now, before taking
six weeks off,
they vote on this, and by 99-1.
The next day, Mitch McConnell
says, the president
made me do it.
You know, these are unintended
ramifications.
I really -- he should have been
stronger,
like we're puppets of the
president.
Just in that sense, it was an
incredible scene
to watch.
HARI SREENIVASAN: David?
(CROSSTALK)
DAVID BROOKS: Substantively, I
do side with
the administration on this.
We just can't have a foreign
policy where
every individual gets to sue a
foreign government
and run our own foreign policy
through the
court system.
And so Obama is right on the
merits.
It's tough to vote against the
9/11 families.
But the president didn't make
them sign a
bill that he opposed.
And I agree with Mark on that
one.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
David Brooks,
Mark Shields, thanks so much.
With the vice presidential
debate on Tuesday
and two more presidential
debates to come,
check out watchthedebates.org,
where you can
interact wither every
presidential debate
since 1960.
Now the latest addition to the
"NewsHour"
Bookshelf.
It's a closer look at the roots
of the Islamic
State in the wake of 9/11 and
the people affected
by its spread in an unstable
Middle East.
Jeffrey Brown has that.
JEFFREY BROWN: Lawrence Wright
first went
to the Middle East as a young
man to teach
English in Cairo.
It was the beginning of a long
relationship
with the region that would
coincide with the
rise of terrorism and American
wars that continue
to this day.
His 2006 book, "The Looming
Tower," on the
growth of al-Qaida and events
leading to 9/11,
won the Pulitzer Prize.
Now he's pulled together
writings from "The
New Yorker" magazine, the
product of many
years of reporting, in a new
book titled "The
Terror Years: From Al-Qaeda to
the Islamic
State."
And, Larry Wright, welcome back
to you.
LAWRENCE WRIGHT, Author, "The
Terror Years:
From Al-Qaeda to the Islamic
State": Thank
you, Jeff.
It's good to be with you.
JEFFREY BROWN: Fifteen years
after 9/11, I
suppose there is a sense of
wanting to tie
things together.
Did you see a guiding thread in
your work
when you went back to look at
it?
LAWRENCE WRIGHT: Yes.
I was planning just to put
together a collection
of articles, but then when I
looked at all
the work that I had done on
terrorism since
9/11, I never thought that I
would still be
writing about that 15 years
later.
But I realized these pieces told
-- had a
kind of narrative quality in
terms of the
evolution of ISIS and al-Qaida
and how it's
developed from 9/11 until today.
JEFFREY BROWN: Your weigh-in has
always been
the individual stories, right..
LAWRENCE WRIGHT: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: ... to tell a
larger story,
whether they're Americans or
Egyptians, Saudis,
a Syrian filmmaker.
These people stay with you?
LAWRENCE WRIGHT: It's a
privilege, first of
all, to be able to go out and
tell these stories,
but to meet these remarkable
individuals and
tell their stories.
It's what I was born to do.
But I don't think you can
understand terrorism,
radicalization.
You know, we can analyze it to
death, but
unless you understand a single
individual's
journey, that makes it much more
clear, I
think, to the reader, and that's
what I aspire
to do.
JEFFREY BROWN: I wanted to ask
you one particular
essay that hit me going back to
it, "Captured
on Film."
LAWRENCE WRIGHT: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: This was from
Syria in 2006
about the very small film
industry at that
time.
LAWRENCE WRIGHT: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: And you work, "I
found a people
who had been beaten into
silence."
Now, these years later, it's
impossible to
think about a film industry when
we think
about Syria.
But do you see a connection to
what you saw
then to today?
LAWRENCE WRIGHT: Yes,
unfortunately.
The reason I went there is, you
know, the
Middle East is a very valuable
place.
It's a paradise for reporters,
except when
they're targeted.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
LAWRENCE WRIGHT: But I thought,
one day, Syria
is so quiet.
And it was like the dog that
didn't bark.
And I went to the editor at "The
New Yorker"
with this observation.
But that's not a story.
So, I thought, well, people know
about America
through our movies.
So, I will go to Syria and I
will watch their
movies and talk to their
filmmakers and see
if I can understand their
culture.
And physical abuse was a common
element.
Everybody I met had been beaten,
by their
parents, or their schoolteachers
or the police.
You know, it was a culture that
had already
suffered an enormous amount of
trauma.
And you know, my fixer, this
lovely young
woman, her...
JEFFREY BROWN: Fixer is the
local producer
there.
LAWRENCE WRIGHT: Yes.
Her parents had been in
political prison,
her mother for two-and-a-half
years, her father
for 13 years.
He had been tortured.
He had been locked in isolation.
And so he came home.
And what did he do?
He beat her up on a number of
occasions and
locked her in her room.
That was a common tale.
And I think a lot of times, when
America wanders
into regions that it so poorly
understands,
we don't know what we're facing.
Iraq was a classic example of us
becoming
involved in a culture that we
totally didn't
understand.
JEFFREY BROWN: Finally, I want
to ask you
about -- because you're also
looking at us,
right, 15 years later.
LAWRENCE WRIGHT: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Fifteen years
later, 15 years
ago, people said the world has
changed; 9/11
changed everything.
Did it, when you look back now?
LAWRENCE WRIGHT: America's
changed profoundly.
And I reflect on the fact that I
took a date
to the airport one time when I
was a young
man in high school.
I didn't have money to take her
out.
It was Dallas, Texas.
It was called Love Field.
JEFFREY BROWN: Right.
LAWRENCE WRIGHT: So -- but back,
then we walked
out on the tarmac and climbed up
into this
international jetliner that had
just come
in from Paris, we supposed.
And we sat in the first-class
section, and
the stewardess brought us a
snack.
And then we went up in the FAA
tower.
And I opened the unlocked door.
And they said, come on in, kids.
And we sat down and watched them
land the
planes.
That America is long dead, and
terrorism killed
it.
But if it's forgotten, if that
community of
trust and safety is forgotten,
then I think
that we will have lost in some
way in this
battle against terrorism.
Those are the liberties that we
had, freedoms.
And we often talk about that
that's what we're
fighting for.
But, at the same time, we're
compromising
all those very freedoms.
I'm not saying that some of
those compromises
aren't necessary, but we need to
keep in our
heart the idea that there was a
country where
those kinds of freedoms were
freely exercised.
JEFFREY BROWN: The book is "The
Terror Years."
Lawrence Wright, thank you so
much.
LAWRENCE WRIGHT: My pleasure.
HARI SREENIVASAN: On the
"NewsHour" online:
Spirits were up in Miami this
week when 56
of the world's five best
bartenders faced
off in an intense competition.
Jennifer Le Nechet of France
took home the
crown, becoming the first woman
to win the
title of Bartender of the Year.
Find our video of the event on
our home page.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And a reminder about some
upcoming programs
from our PBS colleagues.
Gwen Ifill is preparing for
"Washington Week,"
which airs later this evening.
Here's a preview:
GWEN IFILL: Five days later,
Donald Trump
is keeping one story alive, not
about immigration
or the economy or trade, but
about what he
had to say about a beauty queen.
Plus, the president loses a
fight with Congress
over whether 9/11 victims should
be able to
sue one of our allies.
It's a counterintuitive week,
but we will
explain why it all kind of makes
political
sense tonight on "Washington
Week" -- Hari.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Thanks, Gwen.
On "PBS NewsHour Weekend": an
elite team of
disaster relief workers on an
urgent mission
to save Italy's cultural
heritage.
That's tomorrow's signature
segment.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Have a great weekend.
Thank you, and good night.